So you've made it,
you've written Web Assembly.
You've written assembly scripts,
you've written directly to memory.
You've read from memory, you've done
things that most JavaScript engineers will
never do or
never have the opportunity to do.
And if you take away nothing else
you've now understand at a very very
low level how computers and
programming works which is pretty cool.
I believe there's no such thing as
bad knowledge to have it all comes
together to make you a better engineer.
But you know what's gonna happen
is I eventually you're gonna
go back to the office,
you're gonna be like yeah,
I took this course on introduction to
Web Assembly and I don't wanna brag.
But I can write Assembly now, I'm pretty
good and then someone's gonna be like,
well, actually and then they're gonna say,
why don't you use JavaScript's?
And you'll be like, well, last one
was faster or you'll say some reason.
And I want to like address that because
it's the biggest point of contention
between when people talk about
Web Assembly is, which one is faster?
Is it JavaScript or Web Assembly?
And I haven't obviously I know the answer
to this, but I'm gonna go ahead and
write an example and I took the this
function we're writing a prime.
Checking if a number is
prime pretty basic example.
I took this from this log rocket post
which is actually pretty useful.
It covers a lot of things we talk about.
But I just, if I take source code or
I take code from somewhere I like to
attribute it and not just like steal it.
Sorry, not steal internet borrow.
So I wrote for this case,
I'm just gonna copy and
paste cuz we we're not gonna learn
anything by me writing it out.
I know I said don't do that, but
it's my course and I do what I want.
[LAUGH] I'm just gonna paste that
in there and I'm gonna compile it.
This is just checking
if a number is prime,
it's something you've probably all
seen before it's nothing fancy.
Just for the sake of example and
then in my index dot HTML,
I'm just gonna copy all of this and then
I'll explain what exactly we're doing.
Because what we really want to do
is figure out which one is faster.
So copy, copy, copy, copy, copy, copy.
Come back.
And in my index HTML.
And I can delete this other stuff,
there we go.
If you wanna follow along you can do this,
it's an exercise seven of the repo.
I've wiped away most of stuff, but
if you sorta wanna run this on your own,
play around, it's all there available.
And I'm gonna build as we
do hopefully it builds.
So what we did was we created this
checking is prime when we wrote this in
assembly scripts, and
it just checks if a number is prime.
And then we took that same code and
we wrote it in JavaScripts,
which in this case is
pretty straightforward.
It looks identical just it
doesn't have the types.
So now, let's check out which is faster.
Okay, so I have an input box.
So if I type in a number,
it's gonna check, which one is faster?
And I'm outputting this to the console
may make that a little bigger.
And what we're doing is we're
running the sample 1000 times,
actually a pretty low sample.
So I'm using performance now to get
as close to precision as I can.
I'm calling the Web Assembly function,
checking if this number is prime and
then I'm outputting the time.
And then I'm doing the same thing
with a JavaScript function and
then I'm outputting the time and
we're doing this 1000 times.
I then take the results of that and
I reduce it down to an array where if
JavaScript is faster,
I increment the JavaScript counter.
If Wasm is faster, increment the Wasm.
I increase the Wasm wide array and
then I'll put that data into a table.
In case you all didn't know,
console that table, it's really nice.
It's pretty look at this.
So these are the results of 1000
iterations on that is prime.
This is not rigorous.
This is not comprehensive.
This isn't something that you're
like I've proved anything.
This is just an example and because under
the hood there are a lot of optimizations
that compilers are doing things like that.
It's not a good one, one comparison.
This is just for example,
I try to make that very very clear.
So, in this case,
it turns out that Wasm was faster in 1000
iterations was faster 868
times than JavaScript.
What about a larger number?
Wasm is still faster
875 against 125 larger,
larger, larger, larger and
we probably hit a,
actually, at this point
we've locked up JavaScript.
We looked at the page because
JavaScript runs in the UI thread so
we can't update anymore.
But this is just a toy example, to say
that, is JavaScript faster than Wasm?
It depends.
It really depends on what you're doing.
There is an inherent costs,
there's a performance overhead costs
of reading and writing to memory.
Because remember, that's the only way
we can actually communicate with Wasm
is doing it through the memory
buffer that's shared array buffer.
And there is a cost to going back and
forth doing that.
So in general, if you have really
heavy computations that are writing
directly to memory Wasm
is gonna be faster.
It can be in some benchmarks
up to 20 times faster.
But remember, if you're doing
stuff with strings or objects or
giant arrays or
complicated data structures,
my personal recommendation
is to stick with JavaScript.
The abstractions and
the garbage collection and
not having to allocate memory makes
working in JavaScript much simpler.
I would use a web worker for
a lot of things.
However, if you have a game where
you're actually writing pixels or
you're writing points on a graph and
you're writing directly in the memory and
you have a heavy computations, do I
would use Wasm or I'd use Web Assembly.
It's gonna be a superior
platform in this case.
Or if you have something with image
decoding or video decoding or
anything like that,
anything when you're manipulating
bytes directly from the source, I would
always use Web Assembly if possible.
So that was a completely contrived example
to say JavaScript is not necessarily
faster than Wasm.
They both have their use cases and it's
important to understand when to use them.
What's the famous saying from Fast and
the Furious three, Tokyo Drift?
No, no, yeah.
That I'm confusing my metaphors but
it's the one when all you have is
a hammer everything looks like a nail.
That's the same thing when if, when people
leave this course I don't wanna be like,
I'm gonna rewrite
everything in Web Assembly.
Well, no, that's not necessarily
the best course of action.
What I really want you to do is
think carefully about the pros and
cons and
the trade offs you're working with.
And you're saying, well, okay,
but what if I use the web worker?
A web worker is kind of the same idea,
right?
It's a different process,
it's a different thread.
It's not gonna lock up the UI thread
which this page is still locked up.
And I can do sort of the same
thing as Web Assembly.
Why would I not use that?
I mentioned earlier, but
Web Assembly can be cached.
You can fetch that instantiate that and
cache that into memory on the browser.
A web worker, you can't do that.
It inherently has a high memory cost and
a high startup time.
And the only way to communicate
with a with a web worker is yet
to use post message.
And post message is an inefficient way of
communicating between threads because it
takes the data you're trying
to pass it serializes that.
Then it gets to serialize and then,
it keeps doing that back and forth.
And that's just not terribly efficient,
there is a use case for web workers.
And that's when you need to do complex
calculations, involving say, objects or
something, or complicated data structures.
I would use web workers for
those, but they're all three.
They're all different parts
of the same equation and
that's working in the browser.
There is no one case where I'd say, yeah,
you should definitely use one or
the other.
It really depends on you and
your programming style and
kind of what your end goal is.
So, hopefully that clears it up
because I know a lot of people
wanted this course thinking, well I sure
hope I know when to use Web Assembly.
So hopefully you do now and that makes
it a little more clear or less clear,
who knows?